When neural networks were first
invented many decades ago,
the original motivation was to
write software that could mimic
how the human brain or how
the biological brain
learns and thinks.
Even though today,
neural networks,
sometimes also called
artificial neural networks,
have become very
different than how any of
us might think about how
the brain actually
works and learns.
Some of the biological
motivations
still remain in the way we think
about artificial neural networks
or computer neural
networks today.
Let's start by taking a
look at how the brain
works and how that relates
to neural networks.
The human brain, or
maybe more generally,
the biological brain demonstrates
a higher level or more
capable level of
intelligence and
anything else would be
on the bill so far.
So neural networks
has started with
the motivation of
trying to build
software to mimic the brain.
Work in neural networks had
started back in the 1950s,
and then it fell out
of favor for a while.
Then in the 1980s
and early 1990s,
they gained in popularity
again and showed
tremendous traction
in some applications
like handwritten
digit recognition,
which were used
even backed then to
read postal codes for writing
mail and for reading
dollar figures in
handwritten checks.
But then it fell out of favor
again in the late 1990s.
It was from about
2005 that it enjoyed
a resurgence and also became
re-branded little bit
with deep learning.
One of the things that
surprised me back then
was deep learning and
neural networks meant
very similar things.
But maybe under-appreciated
at the time that the
term deep learning,
just sounds much better
because it's deep
and this learning.
So that turned out
to be the brand that
took off in the last decade
or decade and a half.
Since then, neural networks have
revolutionized application
area after application area.
I think the first
application area
that modern neural
networks or deep learning,
had a huge impact on was
probably speech recognition,
where we started to see
much better speech
recognition systems due to
modern deep learning
and authors such as
[inaudible] and Geoff Hinton
were instrumental to this,
and then it started to make
inroads into computer vision.
Sometimes people still speak of
the ImageNet moments in 2012,
and that was maybe a bigger
splash where then [inaudible]
draw their imagination and
had a big impact on
computer vision.
Then the next few years,
it made us inroads into
texts or into natural
language processing,
and so on and so forth.
Now, neural networks are
used in everything from
climate change to medical
imaging to online advertising
to prouduct recommendations
and really lots of
application areas
of machine learning
now use neural networks.
Even though today's
neural networks have
almost nothing to do with
how the brain learns,
there was the early
motivation of
trying to build software
to mimic the brain.
So how does the brain work?
Here's a diagram illustrating
what neurons in a
brain look like.
All of human thought is from
neurons like this in
your brain and mine,
sending electrical impulses and
sometimes forming new
connections of other neurons.
Given a neuron like this one,
it has a number of
inputs where it receives
electrical impulses
from other neurons,
and then this neuron that I've
circled carries out
some computations and
will then send this outputs
to other neurons by this
electrical impulses,
and this upper neuron's
output in turn
becomes the input to
this neuron down below,
which again aggregates
inputs from
multiple other neurons to then
maybe send its own output,
to yet other neurons,
and this is the stuff of
which human thought is made.
Here's a simplified diagram
of a biological neuron.
A neuron comprises a cell
body shown here on the left,
and if you have taken
a class in biology,
you may recognize this to be
the nucleus of the neuron.
As we saw on the previous slide,
the neuron has different inputs.
In a biological neuron,
the input wires are
called the dendrites,
and it then occasionally
sends electrical impulses
to other neurons via
the output wire,
which is called the axon.
Don't worry about these
biological terms.
If you saw them in
a biology class,
you may remember them,
but you don't really need to
memorize any of these terms for
the purpose of building
artificial neural networks.
But this biological
neuron may then send
electrical impulses that become
the input to another neuron.
So the artificial
neural network uses
a very simplified
Mathematical model
of what a biological
neuron does.
I'm going to draw
a little circle
here to denote a single neuron.
What a neuron does is
it takes some inputs,
one or more inputs,
which are just numbers.
It does some computation
and it outputs
some other number,
which then could be an
input to a second neuron,
shown here on the right.
When you're building an
artificial neural network
or deep learning algorithm,
rather than building
one neuron at a time,
you often want to
simulate many such
neurons at the same time.
In this diagram, I'm
drawing three neurons.
What these neurons do
collectively is
input a few numbers,
carry out some computation,
and output some other numbers.
Now, at this point,
I'd like to give one big caveat,
which is that even though I made
a loose analogy between
biological neurons and
artificial neurons,
I think that today we have
almost no idea how the
human brain works.
In fact, every few years,
neuroscientists make some
fundamental breakthrough
about how the brain works.
I think we'll continue to do
so for the foreseeable future.
That to me is a
sign that there are
many breakthroughs
that are yet to be
discovered about how the
brain actually works,
and thus attempts to blindly
mimic what we know of
the human brain today,
which is frankly very little,
probably won't get us that far
toward building
raw intelligence.
Certainly not with
our current level
of knowledge in neuroscience.
Having said that, even with
these extremely simplified
models of a neuron,
which we'll talk about,
we'll be able to build
really powerful deep
learning algorithms.
So as you go deeper into
neural networks and
into deep learning,
even though the origins were
biologically motivated,
don't take the biological
motivation too seriously.
In fact, those of us that do
research in deep learning have
shifted away from looking to
biological motivation that much.
But instead, they're just using
engineering principles to figure
out how to build algorithms
that are more effective.
But I think it might still
be fun to speculate and
think about how
biological neurons
work every now and then.
The ideas of neural
networks have
been around for many decades.
A few people have asked me,
"Hey Andrew, why now?
Why is it that only
in the last handful
of years that neural networks
have really taken off?"
This is a picture I draw
for them when I'm
asked that question
and that maybe you could draw
for others as well if they
ask you that question.
Let me plot on the
horizontal axis
the amount of data you
have for a problem,
and on the vertical axis,
the performance or
the accuracy of
a learning algorithm
applied to that problem.
Over the last couple of decades,
with the rise of the Internet,
the rise of mobile phones,
the digitalization
of our society,
the amount of data
we have for a lot of
applications has steadily
marched to the right.
Lot of records that
use P on paper,
such as if you order something
rather than it being
on a piece of paper,
there's much more likely
to be a digital record.
Your health record,
if you see a doctor,
is much more likely
to be digital
now compared to on
pieces of paper.
So in many application areas,
the amount of digital
data has exploded.
What we saw was with
traditional machine-learning
algorithms,
such as logistic regression
and linear regression,
even as you fed those
algorithms more data,
it was very difficult to get
the performance to
keep on going up.
So it was as if
the traditional learning
algorithms like
linear regression and
logistic regression,
they just weren't able to scale
with the amount of data
we could now feed it
and they weren't able to
take effective advantage
of all this data we had for
different applications.
What AI researchers
started to observe was
that if you were to train
a small neural network
on this dataset,
then the performance
maybe looks like this.
If you were to train a
medium-sized neural network,
meaning one with
more neurons in it,
its performance may
look like that.
If you were to train a
very large neural network,
meaning one with a lot of
these artificial neurons,
then for some applications
the performance will
just keep on going up.
So this meant two things,
it meant that for
a certain class of
applications where you
do have a lot of data,
sometimes you hear the
term big data toss around,
if you're able to train
a very large neural
network to take advantage
of that huge amount
of data you have,
then you could attain
performance on anything
ranging from speech recognition,
to image recognition,
to natural language processing
applications and many more,
they just were not possible with
earlier generations of
learning algorithms.
This caused deep learning
algorithms to take off,
and this too is why faster
computer processors,
including the rise of GPUs
or graphics processor units.
This is hardware
originally designed to
generate nice-looking
computer graphics,
but turned out to be really
powerful for deep
learning as well.
That was also a major force in
allowing deep
learning algorithms
to become what it is today.
That's how neural
networks got started,
as well as why they took off
so quickly in the
last several years.
Let's now dive more deeply into
the details of how neural
network actually works.
Please go on to the next video.